My Father’s Trees in Dehra
Our trees still grow in Dehra. This is one part of the world where trees are a match for man. An old
peepul may be cut down to make way for a new building; two peepul trees will sprout from the walls
of the building. In Dehra the air is moist, the soil hospitable to seeds and probing roots. The valley of
Dehra Dun lies between the first range of the Himalayas and the smaller but older Siwalik range.
Dehra is an old town, but it was not in the reign of Rajput prince or Mogul king that it really grew and
flourished; it acquired a certain size and importance with the coming of British and Anglo-Indian
settlers. The English have an affinity with trees, and in the rolling hills of Dehra they discovered a
retreat which, in spite of snakes and mosquitoes, reminded them, just a little bit, of England’s green
and pleasant land.
The mountains to the north are austere and inhospitable; the plains to the south are flat, dry and
dusty. But Dehra is green. I look out of the train window at daybreak, to see the sal and shisham trees
sweep by majestically, while trailing vines and great clumps of bamboo give the forest a darkness
and density which add to its mystery. There are still a few tigers in these forests; only a few, and
perhaps they will survive, to stalk the spotted deer and drink at forest pools.
I grew up in Dehra. My grandfather built a bungalow on the outskirts of the town, at the turn of the
century. The house was sold a few years after independence. No one knows me now in Dehra, for it is
over twenty years since I left the place, and my boyhood friends are scattered and lost; and although
the India of Kim is no more, and the Grand Trunk Road is now a procession of trucks instead of a
slow-moving caravan of horses and camels, India is still a country in which people are easily lost
and quickly forgotten.
From the station I take a tonga. I can take either a taxi or a snappy little scooter-rickshaw (Dehra
had neither, before 1950), but, because I am on an unashamedly sentimental pilgrimage, I take a
tonga, drawn by a lean, listless pony, and driven by a tubercular old Moslem in a shabby green
waistcoat. Only two or three tongas stand outside the station. There were always twenty or thirty here
in the nineteen-forties, when I came home from boarding school to be met at the station by my
grandfather; but the days of the tonga are nearly over, and in many ways this is a good thing, because
most tonga ponies are overworked and underfed. Its wheels squeaking from lack of oil and its seat
slipping out from under me, the tonga drags me through the bazaars of Dehra. A couple of miles at
this slow, funereal pace makes me impatient to use my own legs, and I dismiss the tonga when we get
to the small Dilaram Bazaar.
It is a good place from which to start walking.
The Dilaram Bazaar has not changed very much. The shops are run by a new generation of bakers,
barbers and banias, but professions have not changed. The cobblers belong to the lower castes, the
bakers are Moslems, the tailors are Sikhs. Boys still fly kites from the flat roof-tops, and women
wash clothes on the canal steps. The canal comes down from Rajpur and goes underground here, to
emerge about a mile away.
I have to walk only a furlong to reach my grandfather’s house. The road is lined with eucalyptus,
jacaranda and laburnum trees. In the compounds there are small groves of mangoes, lichis and
papayas. The poinsettia thrusts its scarlet leaves over garden wall. Every verandah has its
bougainvillaea creeper, every garden its bed of marigolds. Potted palms, those symbols of Victorian
snobbery, are popular with Indian housewives. There are a few houses, but most of the bungalows
were built by ‘old India hands,’ on their retirement from the Army, the police or the railways. Most of
the present owners are Indian businessmen or Government officials.
I am standing outside my grandfather’s house. The wall has been raised, and the wicket-gate has
disappeared; I cannot get a clear view of the house and garden. The nameplate identifies the owner as
Major General Saigal; the house has had more than one owner since my grandparents sold it in 1949.
On the other side of the road there is an orchard of lichi trees. This is not the season for fruit, and
there is no one looking after the garden. By taking a little path that goes through the orchard, I reach
higher ground and gain a better view of our old house.
Grandfather built the house with granite rocks taken from the foothills. It shows no sign of age. The
lawn has disappeared; but the big jackfruit tree, giving shade to the side verandah, is still there. In
this tree I spent my afternoons, absorbed in my Magnets, Champions and Hotspurs, while sticky
mango juice trickled down my chin. (One could not eat the jackfruit unless it was cooked into a
vegetable curry.) There was a hole in the bole of the tree in which I kept my pocket-knife, top,
catapult and any badges or buttons that could be saved from my father’s RAF tunics when he came
home on leave. There was also an Iron Cross, a relic of the First World War, given to me by my
grandfather. I have managed to keep the Iron Cross; but what did I do with my top and catapult?
Memory fails me. Possibly they are still in the hole in the jackfruit tree; I must have forgotten to
collect them when we went away after my father’s death. I am seized by a whimsical urge to walk in
at the gate, climb into the branches of the jackfruit tree, and recover my lost possessions. What would
the present owner, the Major General (retired), have to say if I politely asked permission to look for a
catapult left behind more than twenty years ago?
An old man is coming down the path through the lichi trees. He is not a Major General but a poor
street vendor. He carries a small tin trunk on his head, and walks very slowly. When he sees me he
stops and asks me if I will buy something. I can think of nothing I need, but the old man looks so tired,
so very old, that I am afraid he will collapse if he moves any further along the path without resting. So
I ask him to show me his wares. He cannot get the box off his head by himself, but together we
manage to set it down in the shade, and the old man insists on spreading its entire contents on the
grass;: bangles, combs, shoelaces, safety-pins, cheap stationery, buttons, pomades, elastic and scores
of other household necessities.
When I refuse buttons because there is no one to sew them on for me, he piles me with safety-pins.
I say no; but as he moves from one article to another, his querulous, persuasive voice slowly wears
down my resistance, and I end up by buying envelopes, a letter-pad (pink roses on bright blue paper),
a one-rupee fountain pen guaranteed to leak and several yards of elastic. I have no idea what I will do
with the elastic, but the old man convinces me that I cannot live without it.
Exhausted by the effort of selling me a lot of things I obviously do not want, he closes his eyes and
leans back against the trunk of a lichi tree. For a moment I feel rather nervous. Is he going to die
sitting here beside me? He sinks to his haunches and his chin on his hands. He only wants to talk.
‘I am very tired, hazoor,’ he says. ‘Please do not mind if I sit here for a while.’
‘Rest for as long as you like,’ I say. That’s a heavy load you’ve been carrying.’
He comes to life at the chance of a conversation, and says, ‘When I was a young man, it was
nothing. I could carry my box up from Rajpur to Mussoorie by the bridle-path — seven steep miles!
But now I find it difficult to cover the distance from the station to the Dilaram Bazaar.’
‘Naturally. You are quite old.’
‘I am seventy, sahib.’
‘You look very fit for your age.’ I say this to please him; he looks frail and brittle. ‘Isn’t there
someone to help you?’ I ask.
‘I had a servant boy last month, but he stole my earnings and ran off to Delhi. I wish my son was
alive — he would not have permitted me to work like a mule for a living — but he was killed in the
riots in forty-seven.’
‘Have you no other relatives?’
‘I have outlived them all. That is the curse of a healthy life. Your friends, your loved ones, all go
before you, and at the end you are left alone. But I must go too, before long. The road to the bazaar
seems to grow longer every day. The stones are harder. The sun is hotter in the summer, and the wind
much colder in the winter. Even some of the trees that were there in my youth have grown old and
have died. I have outlived the trees.’
He has outlived the trees. He is like an old tree himself, gnarled and twisted. I have the feeling that
if he falls asleep in the orchard, he will strike root here, sending out crooked branches. I can imagine
a small bent tree wearing a black waist-coat; a living scarecrow.
He closes his eyes again, but goes on talking.
‘The English memsahibs would buy great quantities of elastic. Today it is ribbons and bangles for
the girls, and combs for the boys. But I do not make much money. Not because I cannot walk very far.
How many houses do I reach in a day? Ten, fifteen. But twenty years ago I could visit more than fifty
houses. That makes a difference.’
‘Have you always been here?’
‘Most of my life, hazoor. I was here before they built the motor road to Mussoorie, I was here
when the sahibs had their own carriages and ponies and the memsahibs their own rickshaws. I was
here before there were any cinemas. I was here when the Prince of Wales came to Dehra Dun … Oh, I
have been here a long time, hazoor. I was here when that house was built,’ he says, pointing with his
chin towards my grandfather’s house. ‘Fifty, sixty years ago it must have been. I cannot remember
exactly. What is ten years when you have lived seventy? But it was a tall, red-bearded sahib who
built that house. He kept many creatures as pets. A kachwa, a turtle, was one of them. And there was a
python, which crawled into my box one day and gave me a terrible fright. The sahib used to keep it
hanging from his shoulders, like a garland. His wife, the burra-mem, always bought a lot from me —
lots of elastic. And there were sons, one a teacher, another in the Air Force, and there were always
children in the house. Beautiful children. But they went away many years ago. Everyone has gone
away.’
I do not tell him that I am one of the ‘beautiful children,’ I doubt if he would believe me. His
memories are of another age, another place, and for him there are no strong bridges into the present.
‘But others have come,’ I say.
‘True, and that is as it should be. That is not my complaint. My complaint — should God be
listening — is that I have been left behind.’
He gets slowly to his feet and stands over his shabby tin box, gazing down at it with a mixture of
disdain and affection. I help him to lift and balance it on the flattened cloth on his head. He does not
have the energy to turn and make a salutation of any kind; but, setting his sights on the distant hills, he
walks down the path with steps that are shaky and slow but still wonderfully straight.
I wonder how much longer he will live. Perhaps a year or two, perhaps a week, perhaps an hour. It
will be an end of living, but it will not be death. He is too old for death; he can only sleep; he can
only fell gently, like an old, crumpled brown leaf.
I leave the orchard. The bend in the road hides my grandfather’s house. I reach the canal again. It
emerges from under a small culvert, where ferns and maidenhair grow in the shade. The water,
coming from a stream in the foot-hills, rushes along with a familiar sound; it does not lose its
momentum until the canal has left the gently sloping streets of the town.
There are new buildings on this road, but the small police station is housed in the same old
limewashed bungalow. A couple of off-duty policemen, partly uniformed but with their pyjamas on,
stroll hand in hand on the grass verge. Holding hands (with persons of the same sex of course) is
common practice in northern India, and denotes no special relationship.
I cannot forget this little police station. Nothing very exciting ever happened in its vicinity until, in
1947, communal riots broke out in Dehra. Then, bodies were regularly fished out of the canal and
dumped on a growing pile in the station compound. I was only a boy, but when I looked over the wall
at that pile of corpses, there was no one who paid any attention to me. They were too busy to send me
away; at the same time they knew that I was perfectly safe. While Hindu and Moslem were at each
other’s throats, a white boy could walk the streets in safety. No one was any longer interested in the
Europeans.
The people of Dehra are not violent by nature, and the town has no history of communal discord.
But when refugees from the partitioned Punjab poured into Dehra in their thousands, the atmosphere
became charged with tension. These refugees, many of them Sikhs, had lost their homes and
livelihoods; many had seen their loved ones butchered. They were in a fierce and vengeful frame of
mind. The calm, sleepy atmosphere of Dehra was shattered during two months of looting and murder.
Those Moslems who could get away fled. The poorer members of the community remained in a
refugee camp until the holocaust was over; then they returned to their former occupation, frightened
and deeply mistrustful. The old boxman was one of them.
I cross the canal and take the road that will lead me to the river-bed. This was one of my father’s
favourite walks. He, too, was a walking man. Often, when he was home on leave, he would say,
‘Ruskin, let’s go for a walk,’ and we would slip off together and walk down to the river-bed or into
the sugar-cane fields or across the railway lines and into the jungle.
On one of these walks (this was before Independence), I remember him saying, ‘After the war is
over, we’ll be going to England. Would you like that?’
‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘Can’t we stay in India?’
‘It won’t be ours any more.’
‘Has it always been ours?’ I asked.
‘For a long time,’ he said. ‘Over two hundred years. But we have to give it back now.’
‘Give it back to whom?’ I asked. I was only nine.
‘To the Indians,’said my father.
The only Indians I had known till then were my ayah and the cook and the gardener and their
children, and I could not imagine them wanting to be rid of us. The only other Indian who came to the
house was Dr. Ghose, and it was frequently said of him that he was more English than the English. I
could understand my father better when he said, ‘After the war, there’ll be a job for me in England.
There’ll be nothing for me here.’
The war had at first been a distant event; but somehow it kept coming closer. My aunt, who lived in
London with her two children, was killed with them during an air-raid; then my father’s younger
brother died of dysentery on the long walk out from Burma. Both these tragic events depressed my
father. Never in good health (he had been prone to attacks of malaria), he looked more worn and
wasted every time he came home. His personal life was far from being happy, as he and my mother
had separated, she to marry again. I think he looked forward a great deal to the days he spent with me;
far more than I could have realized at the time. I was someone to come back to; someone for whom
things could be planned; someone who could learn from him.
Dehra suited him. He was always happy when he was among trees, and this happiness
communicated itself to me. I felt like drawing close to him. I remember sitting beside him on the
verandah steps one that was trailing near my feet. As we sat there, doing nothing in particular — in
the best gardens, time has no meaning —I found that the tendril was moving almost imperceptibly
away from me and towards my father. Twenty minutes later it had crossed the verandah steps and was
touching my father’s feet. This, in India, is the sweetest of salutations.
There is probably a scientific explanation for the plant’s behaviour — something to do with the
light and warmth on the verandah steps — but I like to think that its movements were motivated
simply by an affection for my father. Sometimes, when I sat alone beneath a tree, I felt a little lonely
or lost. As soon as my father joined me, the atmosphere lightened, the tree itself became more
friendly.
Most of the fruit trees round the house were planted by father; but he was not content with planting
trees in the garden. On rainy days we would walk beyond the river-bed, armed with cuttings and
saplings, and then we would amble through the jungle, planting flowering shrubs betweeen the sal and
shisham trees.
‘But no one ever comes here,’ I protested the first time. ‘Who is going to see them?’
‘Some day,’ he said, ‘someone may come this way … If people keep cutting trees, instead of
planting them, there’ll soon be no forests left at all, and the world will be just one vast desert.’
The prospect of a world without trees became a sort of nightmare for me (and one reason why I
shall never want to live on a treeless moon), and I assisted my father in his tree-planting with great
enthusiasm.
‘One day the trees will move again,’ he said. ‘They’ve been standing still for thousands of years.
There was a time which they could walk about like people, but someone cast a spell on them and
rooted them to one place. But they’re always trying to move — see how they reach out with their
arms!’
We found an island, a small rocky island in the middle of a dry river-bed. It was one of those riverbeds, so common in the foothills, which are completely dry in the summer but flooded during the
monsoon rains. The rains had just begun, and the stream could still be crossed on foot, when we set
out with a number of tamarind, laburnum and coral-tree saplings and cuttings. We spent the day
planting them on the island, then ate our lunch there, in the shelter of a wild plum.
My father went away soon after that tree-planting. Three months later, in Calcutta, he died.
I was sent to boarding-school. My grandparents sold the house and left Dehra. After school, I went
to England. The years passed, my grandparents died, and when I returned to India I was the only
member of the family in the country.
And now I am in Dehra again, on the road to the river-bed.
The houses with their trim gardens are soon behind me, and I am walking through fields of
flowering mustard, which make a carpet of yellow blossom stretching away towards the jungle and
the foothills.
The river-bed is dry at this time of the year. A herd of skinny cattle graze on the short brown grass
at the edge of the jungle. The sal trees have been thinned out. Could our trees have survived? Will our
island be there, or has some flash-flood during a heavy monsoon washed it away completely?
As I look across the dry water-course, my eye is caught by the spectacular red plumes of the coral
blossom. In contrast with the dry, rocky river-bed, the little island is a green oasis. I walk across to
the trees and notice that a number of parrots have come to live in them. A koel-bird challenges me
with a rising who-are-you, who-are-you …
But the trees seem to know me. They whisper among themselves and beckon me nearer. And
looking round, I find that other trees and wild plants and grasses have sprung up under the protection
of the trees we planted.
They have multiplied. They are moving. In this small forgotten corner of the world, my father’s
dreams are coming true, and the trees are moving again.
